---
layout: post
category: [functional programming, scala, haskell]
tags: [functional programming, scala, haskell]
infotext: "simple view on lambda"
---
{% include JB/setup %}

<script type="text/javascript" src="http://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML"></script>

Functional programming languages are all based on the lambda calculus. Some languages 
in this general category incorporate features into the language that aren't 
translatable into lambda expressions. Haskell is a pure functional language.

The word `purity` in functional programming is sometimes also used to mean what is more 
properly called `referential transparency`. Referential transparency means that the 
same function, given the same values to evaluate, will always return the same result 
in pure functional programming, as they do in math.

Scala is an objective oriented language, which incorporates functional programming 
features.

### Function

A function is a relation between a set of possible inputs and a set of possible outputs. 
The function itself defines and represents the relationship.

### Lambda's structure

The lambda calculus has three basic components, or `lambda terms`: expressions, variables, 
and abstractions.

The `expression` refers to a superset of all those things: an expression can be a variable 
name, an abstraction, or a combination of those things. The simplest expression is a 
single variable.

`Variable`s here have no meaning or value, they are names for potential inputs to functions.

An `abstraction` is a `function`. It is a lambda term that has a head (a lambda) and a body 
and is applied to an argument. An `argument` is an input value.

Abstractions consisit of two parts: the `head` and the `body`. The head of the function is 
a \\(\lambda\\) followed by a variable name. The body of the function is another expression.

Following is a simple function:

$$
\lambda x.x
$$

The variable named in the head is the `parameter` and `bind`s al instances of that same 
variable in the body of the function. The `.` separates the parameters of the lambda from 
the function body. It is the `identity` function.

We note that the lambda abstraction \\(\lambda x.x\\) has no name. It is an `anonymous 
function`. A named function can be called by name by another function; an anonymous 
function cannot.

### Reduction

The meaning of lambda expressions is defined by how expressions can be reduced.

There are three kinds of reduction:

- \\(\alpha\\)-conversion: changing bound variables (alpha);
- \\(\beta\\)-reduction: applying functions to their arguments (beta);
- \\(\eta\\)-conversion: which captures a notion of extensionality (eta).

We also speak of the resulting equivalences: two expressions are \\(\beta\\)-equivalent, if they can 
be \\(\beta\\)-converted into the same expression, and \\(\alpha\\)/\\(\eta\\)-equivalence are 
defined similarly.

The term `redex`, short for reducible expression, refers to subterms that can be reduced by one of 
the reduction rules. The expression to which a redex reduces is called its `reduct`.

### Alpha conversion

In the abstraction \\(\lambda x.x\\), the variable \\(x\\) is not semantically meaningful except 
in its role in that single expression. There's a form of equivalence between lambda terms 
called `alpha equivalence`. That says, 

$$
\lambda x.x
$$

$$
\lambda z.z
$$

$$
\lambda d.d
$$

all mean the same thing. They are all the same function.

The `alpha conversion`, sometimes known as `alpha renaming`, allows bound variable names to be 
changed. Terms that differ only by alpha conversion are called \\(\alpha\\) equivalent. 
Frequently, in uses of lambda calculus, \\(\alpha\\) equivalent terms are considered to be 
equivalent.

### Beta reduction

Beta-reduction is defined in terms of substitution: When we apply a function to an argument, we 
substitute the input expression for all instances of bound variables within the body of the 
abstraction, and eliminate the head of the function as well, since its only purpose was to bind a 
variable. This process is called `beta reduction`.

Applications in the lambda calculus are `left associative`.

The purpose of the head of the function is to tell us which variables to replace when we apply 
our function, that is, to bind the variables. A bound variable must have the same value 
throughout the expression.

#### Free variables

Sometimes the body expression has variables that are not named in the head. Those variables are 
called `free variables`.

#### Multiple arguments

Each lambda can only bind one parameter and can only accept one argument. Functions that require 
multiple arguments have multiple, nested heads. When you apply it once and eliminate the first 
(left most) head, the next one is applied, and so on. This formulation is commonly called `currying`.

The following

$$
\lambda xy.xy
$$

is a convinent shorthand for two nested lambdas: 

$$
\lambda x.(\lambda y.xy)
$$

And also note that in the following lambda: 

$$
(\lambda xy.xxy)(\lambda x.xy)(\lambda x.xz)
$$

The substitution process can become a tangle of `x`s that are not the same `x` because each was 
bound by a different head.

With free variables and multiple parameters, the basic process of beta reduction will remain the 
same. The process of beta reduction stops when there are either no more heads, or lambdas, left to 
apply or no more arguments to apply functions to.

The `beta normal form` is when you cannot beta reduce (apply lambdas to arguments) the terms any 
further. This corresponds to a fully evaluated expression, or, in programming, a fully excuted 
program.

### Eta conversion

Eta-conversion expresses the idea of extensionality, which in this context is that two functions are 
the same if and only if they give the same result for all arguments. Eta-conversion converts between 
\\(\lambda x.(f x)\\) and \\(f\\) whenever \\(x\\) does not appear free in \\(f\\).

Following is an exmple in Scala:

{% highlight scala linenos=table %}

def sum(x: Int, y :Int): Int  =  x + y

val sumFunc = sum
// or val sumFunc = sum(_: Int, _: Int)

{% endhighlight %}

### Combinators

A `combinator` is a lambda term with no free variables. Combinators, as the name suggests, serve 
only to `combine` the arguments it is given.

### Divergence

Not all reducible lambda terms reduce neatly to a beta normal form. This isn't because they'are 
already fully reduced, but rather because they `diverge`. Divergence here means that the reduction 
process never terminates or ends. Reducing terms should ordinarily `converge` to beta normal form, 
and divergence is the opposite of convergence, or normal form. Following is an example of a lambda 
term called `omega` that diverges:

$$
(\lambda x.xx)(\lambda x.xx)
$$

This matters in programming because terms that diverge are terms that don't produce an `answer` or 
meaningful result.

### Haskell

There things all apply to Haskell, as they do to any pure functional languages, because semantically 
Haskell is a lambda calculus. Haskell is a `typed lambda calculus` with a lot of surface-level 
decoration sprinkled on top, but the semantics of the core language are the same as the lambda 
calculus.

The meaning of Haskell programs is centered around evaluating expressions rather than executing 
instructions, although Haskell has a way to execute instructions too.

### Scala

Well, Scala uses objects to simulate lambda calculus.